---
layout: distill
title: An Introduction to Quantum Computing
description: A brief introduction to quantum computing
tags: quantum-computing
giscus_comments: true
date: 2025-07-20
featured: true
mermaid:
  enabled: true
  zoomable: true
code_diff: true
map: false
chart:
  chartjs: false
  echarts: false
  vega_lite: false
tikzjax: false
typograms: false

authors:
  - name: Dallas Doherty
    url:
    affiliations:
      name:

bibliography:

# Optionally, you can add a table of contents to your post.
# NOTES:
#   - make sure that TOC names match the actual section names
#     for hyperlinks within the post to work correctly.
#   - we may want to automate TOC generation in the future using
#     jekyll-toc plugin (https://github.com/toshimaru/jekyll-toc).
toc:
  - name: Classical VS Quantum Computing
    # if a section has subsections, you can add them as follows:
    # subsections:
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 1
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 2
  - name: How does a Quantum Computer Work?
  - name: What is Superposition, Entanglement and Quantum Interference?
  - name: Superposition
  - name: Entanglement
  - name: Quantum Interference

# Below is an example of injecting additional post-specific styles.
# If you use this post as a template, delete this _styles block.
_styles: >
  .fake-img {
    background: #bbb;
    border: 1px solid rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    box-shadow: 0 0px 4px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    margin-bottom: 12px;
  }
  .fake-img p {
    font-family: monospace;
    color: white;
    text-align: left;
    margin: 12px 0;
    text-align: center;
    font-size: 16px;
  }
---

## Classical VS Quantum Computing

  Classical computers rely on bits as the fundamental unit of information, where each bit represents either a 0 or 1. These bits correspond to the presence or absence of electrical current flowing through a transistor – it can be thought of like a light switch that can either be “on” (1) or “off” (0). By manipulating sequences of these 1s and 0s, classical computers can execute a wide range of tasks and algorithms. Every program we create for a classical computer is a sequence of instructions that changes one set of bits into another step by step.
  
  While classical computers are, in theory, capable of executing any algorithm, there are limits to their computational power. Some algorithms require an impractically large number of steps, making them infeasible to compute in practice. This is where the allure of quantum computers begins – it is an exciting opportunity to overcome some of these classical limitations.
  
  Additionally, another challenge that sets a boundary to classical computational power is quantum tunneling (Seabaugh, 2013). As we continue to shrink transistors to fit more of them onto a microchip, we run into a weird quantum phenomenon where electrons can start jumping from transistor to transistor, causing errors in computation which creates a barrier to how small and powerful we can make microchips.


---

## How does a Quantum Computer Work?

Every computer has a central processing unit (CPU), responsible for executing any set of instructions it receives. However, due to its versatility, the CPU is not always the most efficient at handling specific tasks. This is where specialized processing units (PUs), such as Graphics Processing Units (GPUs), come into play. GPUs are electronic circuits designed to quickly process and render images and videos.
  
When people discuss the advent of quantum computing they are referring to the development of quantum chips that will receive specific instructions from a CPU. As a result, quantum computers will not operate as independent systems but as processing chips capable of performing tasks that are time-consuming for a CPU, such as complex number multiplication and addition (Ferrie, 2024).
 
Quantum computers differ significantly from classical computers in that they can manipulate sequences of complex numbers (numbers like the square root of –1 and π) using qubits, rather than traditional bits. These computers accept programs that transform one sequence into another, enabling complex or inefficient classical algorithms to be rephrased as steps that alter sequences of complex numbers, rather than just 1s and 0s. By implementing these quantum algorithms, quantum computers can efficiently execute certain programs that would otherwise be infeasible for a classical computer.
 
Qubits, much like classical bits, are used as the basic unit of information to encode data on a quantum computer. However, qubits are distinguished from classical bits, which must always be in the 0 or 1 state, by their ability to be in superposition states with varying probabilities that quantum operations can manipulate during computations.

  Ultimately, a quantum computer works by taking advantage of the unique properties of matter at the smallest scales, such as superposition and entanglement, to solve certain types of complex problems in far fewer steps than classical computers. The technology relies on qubits which sift through vast sets of probabilities using quantum interference to find the most likely answer.


---

## What is Superposition, Entanglement and Quantum Interference?

  Quantum mechanics is a theory that makes predictions about the behaviour of particles on the smallest scales, and the theory has been borne out of numerous experiments supporting the validity of quantum mechanics. Quantum mechanics can sometimes seem like science fiction due to the unintuitive ways in which these tiny particles behave. 

---

## Superposition

Superposition describes the condition in which a quantum system can exist simultaneously in multiple states or configurations. As described above, a classical bit can only exist in two possible states, 0 or 1. In contrast, since a qubit is a quantum system, it can exist in the zero state, the one state, or any state that combines the probability of measuring the qubit in either the zero or one state. It's essential to understand that the state of superposition can only be maintained when a quantum system is unobserved. Once measured, the qubit will either collapse into the 0 or 1 state, corresponding to whichever value the qubit's energetic wave function collapsed to when it was measured. Groups of qubits in superposition create the complex, multidimensional computational spaces that allow quantum computers to process multiple inputs simultaneously. This is unlike a classical computer which can only perform one computation at a time (If 1 do this, if 0 do that). 

In mathematics, superposition is described as a linear combination of basis states. For a qubit the linear combination is denoted as: ψ (the state of the qubit) is equal to the base states (0 and 1), where 1 and 0 are multiplied by their respective probability amplitudes (α and β). The probability amplitudes determine the probability of measuring the qubit in either state when a measurement is made. 

---

## Entanglement

When we can tell something about one object by looking at another object, we call those objects correlated. For example, when you pull a left shoe out of a shoe box, you can almost be sure the remaining shoe is the right one. A special sort of correlation occurs when quantum particles are acted upon in a way that entangles them. Entanglement refers to when two quantum particles are so strongly correlated that the properties of one cannot be described without considering the properties of the other. Instead of being described as two separate wave functions, entangled objects are described by a single joint wave function. This means that the measurement of one of the objects will allow you to know the measurement of the second object immediately. Quantum entanglement is necessary for a quantum algorithm to provide an exponential speed-up over classical computing.

---

## Quantum Interference

A system of entangled qubits placed into a state of collective superposition structures information, or the computation of a given algorithm, in a way that resembles waves, with amplitudes associated with each outcome of the computation. The amplitudes become the probabilities of measuring each outcome in the system. Waves naturally build on each other when they meet at each other's peaks (increasing the probability of an outcome) and cancel each other out when the peaks and troughs interact with each other (diminishing the probability of an outcome). More concisely, interference is the phenomenon in which entangled quantum states can interact and produce more and less likely probabilities (or answers for the computation). 


---
## References

A Bit or Two About Qubits. (n.d.). Retrieved from 1qbit: https://1qbit.com/blog/quantum-computing/a-bit-or-two-about-qubits/
Ferrie, C. (2024). What You Shouldn't Know About Quantum Computers. Creative Commons.
Feynman, R. P., Leighton, R. B., & Sands, M. (1965). The Feynman lectures on physics / Vol. 3, Quantum Mechanics. Addison Wesley.
Google Quantum AI and Collaborators. (2024, December 9). Quantum error correction below the surface code threshold. Retrieved from Nature: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-024-08449-y
IBM Quantum Learning. (2023). Practical Introduction to Quantum-Safe Cryptography. Retrieved from IBM Quantum Learning: https://learning.quantum.ibm.com/course/practical-introduction-to-quantum-safe-cryptography
Microsoft Education. (2025). Explore Quantum - Superposition. Retrieved from Microsoft Quantum: https://quantum.microsoft.com/en-us/insights/education/concepts/superposition
Nikolayev, P., & Panda, S. (2022). Quantum Computing Introduction. Retrieved from Quantum Poet: https://quantumpoet.com/quantum-computing-introduction/
Quantum 101. (n.d.). Retrieved from University of Waterloo Institute for Quantum Computing: https://uwaterloo.ca/institute-for-quantum-computing/resources/quantum-101
Schneider, J., & Smalley, I. (2023, December 1). What is Quantum Cryptography. Retrieved from IBM: https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/quantum-cryptography
Seabaugh, A. (2013, Sep 30). The Tunneling Transistor. Retrieved from IEEE Spectrum: https://spectrum.ieee.org/the-tunneling-transistor
Sheldon, R. (2022, June). What is a bit? Retrieved from TechTarget: https://www.techtarget.com/whatis/definition/bit-binary-digit


